Update ZIP editors, and make process improvements and clarifications (#707)
zcash/zips: zip-0000.rst

ZIP Editors
-----------

The current ZIP Editors are:

> - Daira Emma Hopwood and Jack Grigg (representing the Electric Coin
> Company)
> - teor and Conrado Gouvea (representing the Zcash Foundation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Daira Emma Hopwood and Jack Grigg, associated with the Electric Coin
Company;
- teor and Conrado Gouvea, associated with the Zcash Foundation.
```

All can be reached at zips@z.cash. The current design of the ZIP Process
dictates that there are always at least two ZIP Editors: at least one from the
Electric Coin Company and at least one from the Zcash Foundation.

> Additional Editors may be selected by consensus among the current Editors.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to make this "consensus minus one"?

Reviewer: I think this is fine as-is. It doesn't specify a quorum and that's ok.

> Additional Editors may be selected by consensus among the current Editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional Editors may be selected, with their consent, by consensus among the current Editors.
```

An Editor may be removed or replaced by consensus among the current Editors.
However, if the other ZIP Editors have consensus, an Editor can not prevent their own removal.
Any Editor can resign by informing the other Editors in writing.

> Whenever the ZIP Editors change, the new ZIP Editors should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever the ZIP Editors change, the new ZIP Editors SHOULD:
```

> However, if the other ZIP editors have consensus, an Editor can not prevent their own removal.
> Any Editor can resign by informing the other Editors in writing.
> 
> Whenever the ZIP editors change, the new ZIP editors should:
> - review this ZIP to make sure it reflects current practice,
> - update the owners of this ZIP,
> - review ZIP editor access to the `ZIPs repository <https://github.com/zcash/zips>`,
> - update the <zips@z.cash> email alias, and
> - invite new editors to the Zcash Community Forums, and the #zips channel on Discord.
> 
> If it has been at least 12 months since the last ZIP editor change, the ZIP editors should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if the other ZIP Editors have consensus, an Editor can not prevent their own removal.
Any Editor can resign by informing the other Editors in writing.

Whenever the ZIP Editors change, the new ZIP Editors should:
- review this ZIP to make sure it reflects current practice,
- update the owners of this ZIP,
- review access to the `ZIPs repository <https://github.com/zcash/zips>`,
- update the <zips@z.cash> email alias, and
- invite new editors to the Zcash Community Forums, and the #zips channel on Discord.

If it has been at least 12 months since the last ZIP Editor change, the ZIP Editors should:
```

> If it has been at least 12 months since the last ZIP Editor change, the ZIP Editors should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it has been at least 12 months since the last ZIP Editor change, the ZIP Editors SHOULD:
```

- review this ZIP to make sure it reflects current practice.

ZIP Editor Responsibilities
---------------------------

The ZIP Editors subscribe to the `Zcash Community Forum.
<https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/>`__

Each new ZIP SHOULD be submitted as a "pull request" to the ZIPs git
repository [#zips-repo]_. It SHOULD NOT contain a ZIP number unless
one had already been assigned by the ZIP Editors. The pull request
SHOULD initially be marked as a Draft. The ZIP content SHOULD be

> submitted in RST format. Generating HTML for a ZIP is optional.

Reviewer 2: This change wasn't discussed last week, but it reflects current practice: ZIPs are submitted to both the forums and the git repository before ZIP Editors review them.

> SHOULD initially be marked as a Draft. The ZIP content SHOULD be
> submitted in RST format. Generating HTML for a ZIP is optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SHOULD initially be marked as a Draft. The ZIP content SHOULD be
submitted in reStructuredText or Markdown format. Generating HTML
for a ZIP is OPTIONAL.
```

> For each new ZIP that comes in, the ZIP Editors will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each new ZIP that comes in, the ZIP Editors SHOULD:
```

* Read the ZIP to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The ideas
  must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to be
  accepted.

> * The title should accurately describe the content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Check that the title accurately describes the content.
```

> * The ZIP draft must have been sent to the Zcash Community Forum and as
>   a PR to the ZIPs git repository [#zips-repo]_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ensure that the ZIP draft has been sent to the Zcash Community Forum
  and as a PR to the ZIPs git repository [#zips-repo]_.
```

> * Motivation and backward compatibility (when applicable) must be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Motivation and backward compatibility (when applicable) has been
```

Reviewer 2: Already fixed in another suggestion

> * Motivation and backward compatibility (when applicable) must be
>   addressed.
> * The licensing terms are acceptable for ZIPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure that motivation and backward compatibility (when applicable) have been
  addressed.
* Check that the licensing terms are acceptable for ZIPs.
```

Reviewing a ZIP
---------------

Any ZIP Editor can suggest changes to a ZIP. These suggestions are the
opinion of the individual ZIP Editor. ZIP Editors are expected to perform

> independent technical and process review, regardless of contractural or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
independent technical and process review, regardless of contractual or
```

> opinion of the individual ZIP Editor. ZIP Editors are expected to perform
> independent technical and process review, regardless of contractural or
> any other relationships.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opinion of the individual ZIP Editor. Any technical or process review that
ZIP Editors perform is expected to be independent of their contractual or
other relationships.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

ZIP Editors MUST declare any potential or perceived conflict of interest they have
relating to their responsibilities as ZIP Editors.

```

Reviewer 2: Possibly in the responsibilities section?
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/707/files#diff-6681881651b0d57305d4bfe1eaf84d8f48ab00ec5968a1046370a6f981183085R176

Reviewer 2: Applied earlier at https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/707/files#r1325129681

> ZIP Owners can clarify, modify, or decline suggestions from ZIP Editors.

Reviewer 2: Some of these changes to "ZIP editor suggestions" were discussed, others reflect current practice.

> ZIP Owners can clarify, modify, or decline suggestions from ZIP Editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZIP Owners are free to clarify, modify, or decline suggestions from ZIP Editors.
If the ZIP Editors make a change to a ZIP that the Owner disagrees with, then
the Editors SHOULD revert the change.
```

Typically, the ZIP Editors suggest changes in two phases:
- `content review`: multiple ZIP Editors discuss the ZIP, and suggest
  changes to the overall content. This is a "big picture" review.

> - `format review`: one or two ZIP Editors do a detailed review of the

Reviewer 2: We originally discussed having two editors do format review:
```suggestion
- `format review`: two ZIP Editors do a detailed review of the
```

  structure and format of the ZIP. This ensures the ZIP is consistent
  with other Zcash specifications.

If the ZIP isn't ready, the Editors will send it back to the Owners for
revision, with specific instructions. This decision is made by consensus

> among the current Editors.

Reviewer 2: I can't remember if we discussed consensus for sending a ZIP back to the proposers.

When a ZIP is ready, the ZIP Editors will:

> * Assign a ZIP number in the pull request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ensure that a unique ZIP number has been assigned in the pull request.
```

* Regenerate the corresponding HTML documents, if required.

> * Remove Draft status and merge the pull request when it is ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove Draft status and merge the pull request.
```

The ZIP editors monitor ZIP changes and update ZIP headers as
appropriate.

> Rejecting a proposed ZIP

Author: ```suggestion
Rejecting a proposed ZIP or proposed ZIP change
```

> Rejecting a proposed ZIP
> ------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rejecting a proposed ZIP or update
----------------------------------
```

ZIP Editors
-----------

The current ZIP Editors are:
- Daira Emma Hopwood and Jack Grigg, associated with the Electric Coin
Company;
- teor and Conrado Gouvea, associated with the Zcash Foundation.

All can be reached at zips@z.cash. The current design of the ZIP Process
dictates that there are always at least two ZIP Editors: at least one from the

> Electric Coin Company and at least one from the Zcash Foundation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Electric Coin Company and at least one from the Zcash Foundation.

ZIP Editors MUST declare any potential or perceived conflict of interest they have
relating to their responsibilities as ZIP Editors.
```

Note that it is not the primary responsibility of the ZIP Editors to
review proposals for security, correctness, or implementability.

Communicating with the ZIP Editors
----------------------------------

Please send all ZIP-related communications either:
- by email to <zips@z.cash>,
- by opening an issue on the `ZIPs issue tracker <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues>`, or

> - by sending a message in the `#zips channel on the Zcash R&D Discord <https://discord.com/channels/809218587167293450/809251050741170187>`.

Reviewer 2: I added Discord to reflect current practice. Should we add an invite link as well?

__All communications should abide by the Zcash Code of Conduct [#conduct]_
and follow `the GNU Kind Communication
Guidelines <https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/kind-communication.en.html>`.__

ZIP Editor Meeting Practices
----------------------------

> The ZIP Editors should meet on a regular basis to review draft changes to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZIP Editors SHOULD meet on a regular basis to review draft changes to
```

> The ZIP Editors should meet on a regular basis to review draft changes to
> ZIPs. Meeting times are agreed by rough consensus among the current ZIP Editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZIP Editors SHOULD meet on a regular basis to review draft changes to
ZIPs. Meeting times are agreed by consensus among the current ZIP Editors.
```

A ZIP Editor meeting can be held even if some ZIP Editors are not available, but

> all Editors should be informed of the decisions that will be made at upcoming
> meetings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all Editors SHOULD be informed of significant decisions that are likely be made at
upcoming meetings.
```

The ZIP Editors will appoint a ZIP Secretary, which can be a shared or rotating
role. The ZIP Secretary will:

> - share a draft agenda with the ZIP Editors at least 24 hours before each ZIP Editors meeting,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- share a draft agenda with the ZIP Editors at least 24 hours before each ZIP Editors meeting;
```

> - share draft minutes with the ZIP Editors in the week after the ZIP Editors meeting, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- share draft minutes of significant decisions with the ZIP Editors in the week after the ZIP Editors meeting, and
```

- share significant ZIP changes on the Zcash Community Forums.

> If the draft agenda is empty, any ZIP Editor can submit agenda items, or suggest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the draft agenda is empty, any ZIP Editor MAY submit agenda items, or suggest
```

  once rough consensus is reached in PR/forum posts from Draft Process ZIP.

* Proposed: Typically the stage after Draft, added to a ZIP after
  consideration, feedback, and rough consensus from the community.

>   The Proposed status is approved by consensus among the current ZIP
>   Editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Proposed status MUST be approved by consensus among the current
  ZIP Editors.
```

> * Rejected: The status when progress hasn't been made on the ZIP in one
>   year. Can revert back to Draft/Proposed if the Owner resumes work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Rejected: If no progress on a Draft or Proposed ZIP has been made for
  one year, the ZIP Editors SHOULD move it to Rejected status. It can revert
  back to Draft/Proposed if the Owner resumes work or resolves issues
```

>   or resolves issues preventing consensus. The Rejected status is
>   approved by consensus among the current ZIP Editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  preventing consensus. The Rejected status MUST be approved by consensus
  among the current ZIP Editors.
```

  once rough consensus is reached in PR/forum posts from Draft Process ZIP.

* Proposed: Typically the stage after Draft, added to a ZIP after
  consideration, feedback, and rough consensus from the community.
  The Proposed status MUST be approved by consensus among the current
  ZIP Editors.

* Rejected: If no progress on a Draft or Proposed ZIP has been made for
  one year, the ZIP Editors SHOULD move it to Rejected status. It can revert
  back to Draft/Proposed if the Owner resumes work or resolves issues
  preventing consensus. The Rejected status MUST be approved by
  consensus among the current ZIP Editors.

> * Implemented: When a Consensus or Standards ZIP has a working
>   reference implementation but before activation on the Zcash network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implemented: When a Consensus or Standards ZIP has a working
  reference implementation but before activation on the Zcash network.
  The status MAY indicate which node implementation has implemented
  the ZIP, e.g. "Implemented (zcashd)" or "Implemented (zebra)".
```

> 

Reviewer: Consider whether the section heading "Specification" above should be changed.

> 

Reviewer 2: s/may/MAY above

> A ZIP may only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed, when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZIP SHOULD only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed, when
```

> A ZIP may only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed, when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ZIP SHOULD only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed, when
```

> A ZIP may only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed, when
> the Owner deems it is complete and there is rough consensus on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZIP SHOULD only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed,
when the Owner deems it is complete and there is rough consensus on the
```

forums, validated by consensus among the current ZIP Editors. If it's a
Consensus ZIP, a Deployment section MUST be present in order for the ZIP
to change status to Proposed. Typically, although not necessarily, this

> will specify a network upgrade in which the consensus change is to activate.

Reviewer 2: I removed the specific ECC and ZF requirement here, because we wanted to apply consensus to all significant decisions, not just the Proposed status.

Should we clarify the ECC/ZF requirement where it is first mentioned?
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/707/files#diff-6681881651b0d57305d4bfe1eaf84d8f48ab00ec5968a1046370a6f981183085R174-R176

> A Standards ZIP may only change status from Proposed to Implemented once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Standards ZIP SHOULD only change status from Proposed to Implemented once
```

> Owners of a ZIP may decide on their own to change the status between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Owners of a ZIP MAY decide on their own to change the status between
```

> one year. Such a ZIP may be changed to Draft status if the Owner

Reviewer: Change s/should/SHOULD two lines above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one year. Such a ZIP MAY be changed to Draft status if the Owner
```

provides revisions that meaningfully address public criticism of the
proposal, or to Proposed status if it meets the criteria required as
described in the previous paragraphs. Rejections are applied by consensus
among the current ZIP Editors.

> A Consensus or Standards ZIP becomes Final when its associated network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Consensus or Standards ZIP SHOULD become Final when its associated network
```

> A Consensus or Standards ZIP becomes Final when its associated network

Reviewer 2: Delete this paragraph, it is redundant with the section above.

> upgrade or other protocol change is activated on Zcash's mainnet.

Reviewer 2: s/may/MAY/ two lines below, and 12 lines below.

Reviewer: Also s/must/MUST/ in the next two paragraphs.

Reviewer: Both "Updated by" and "Updated-by" spellings are used for that header. Other header fields use the hyphenated form.
